README.md, before:

# Personal Finance Manager

[![License: Proprietary](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-Proprietary-red.svg)](LICENSE)
[![TypeScript](https://img.shields.io/badge/TypeScript-5.x-blue.svg)](https://www.typescriptlang.org/)
[![Next.js](https://img.shields.io/badge/Next.js-15.x-black.svg)](https://nextjs.org/)

This is a [Next.js](https://nextjs.org) project for managing personal finances, built with TypeScript, PostgreSQL, and Drizzle ORM.

> **Note**: This is a personal project for educational and portfolio purposes. The code is publicly viewable for reference, but all rights are reserved. See [LICENSE](LICENSE) for details.

## Tech Stack

- **Frontend**: Next.js 15 with App Router, TypeScript, Tailwind CSS, shadcn/ui
- **Database**: PostgreSQL with Drizzle ORM
- **Authentication**: JWT tokens with secure password hashing
- **Testing**: Vitest with comprehensive unit and integration tests
- **Type Safety**: Zod schemas for runtime validation and TypeScript inference

## Getting Started

### Prerequisites

- Node.js 18+ and pnpm
- PostgreSQL database
- Environment variables configured (see `.env.example`)

### Installation

1. Install dependencies:
```bash
pnpm install
```

2. Set up your environment variables:
```bash
cp .env.example .env.local
# Edit .env.local with your database credentials
```

3. Set up the database schema:
```bash
# Generate and apply database migrations
pnpm drizzle-kit generate:pg
pnpm drizzle-kit push:pg
```

4. Start the development server:
```bash
pnpm dev
```

Open [http://localhost:3000](http://localhost:3000) with your browser to see the result.

## Database Schema Management

This project uses [Drizzle ORM](https://orm.drizzle.team/) for database schema management and migrations. The schema is defined in `app/api/lib/schema.ts`.

### Updating Database Schema

When you need to modify the database structure:

#### 1. Update the Schema File

Edit `app/api/lib/schema.ts` to add/modify tables, columns, or relations:

```typescript
// Example: Adding a new column
export const transactions = pgTable("transactions", {
  id: serial("id").primaryKey(),
  // ... existing columns
  newColumn: varchar("new_column", { length: 100 }), // Add new column
});
```

#### 2. Generate Migration Files

Generate SQL migration files based on your schema changes:

```bash
pnpm drizzle-kit generate:pg
```

This creates a new migration file in the `drizzle/` directory with the SQL commands needed to update your database.

#### 3. Apply Migrations to Database

Push the schema changes to your PostgreSQL database:

```bash
pnpm drizzle-kit push:pg
```

This command:
- Applies the generated SQL migrations to your database
- Updates the database structure to match your schema
- Handles column additions, deletions, and modifications

#### 4. Update Zod Schemas (if needed)

If you modified data structures, update the corresponding Zod schemas in `lib/schemas.ts`:

```typescript
// Example: Update schema validation
export const TransactionCreateSchema = z.object({
  // ... existing fields
  newField: z.string().optional(), // Add validation for new field
});
```

### Data Migration

For complex schema changes that require data transformation:

#### 1. Check Migration Status

```bash
curl -X GET http://localhost:3000/api/admin/migrate-categories
```

#### 2. Run Data Migration

```bash
curl -X POST http://localhost:3000/api/admin/migrate-categories
```

### Best Practices

- **Always backup your database** before running migrations in production
- **Test migrations locally** before applying to production
- **Review generated SQL** in the migration files before applying
- **Use transactions** for complex data migrations
- **Maintain backward compatibility** when possible during schema changes

### Common Commands

```bash
# Check what changes would be applied
pnpm drizzle-kit generate:pg --custom

# Push changes directly (development only)
pnpm drizzle-kit push:pg

# Open Drizzle Studio for database inspection
pnpm drizzle-kit studio

# Introspect existing database
pnpm drizzle-kit introspect:pg
```

### Schema Structure

The current database includes:

- **users**: User accounts with authentication
- **categories**: Transaction categories with user ownership
- **defaultCategories**: System-wide category templates
- **bankAccounts**: User bank accounts with balance tracking
- **creditCards**: Credit card accounts with limits
- **transactions**: All financial transactions with category relationships

## Development Commands

### Frontend
- `pnpm dev` - Start development server
- `pnpm build` - Build for production
- `pnpm lint` - Run ESLint
- `pnpm typecheck` - Run TypeScript compiler check

### Testing
- `pnpm test` - Run all tests
- `pnpm test:watch` - Run tests in watch mode
- `pnpm test:coverage` - Run tests with coverage

### Database
- `pnpm drizzle-kit generate:pg` - Generate migrations
- `pnpm drizzle-kit push:pg` - Apply schema changes
- `pnpm drizzle-kit studio` - Open database studio

## Features

- **💰 Transaction Management**: Create, edit, and categorize income/expense transactions
- **🏦 Multi-Account Support**: Manage multiple bank accounts and credit cards
- **📊 Category System**: Organize transactions with custom categories and visual indicators
- **🔒 Secure Authentication**: JWT-based authentication with password hashing
- **📱 Responsive Design**: Mobile-first design using Tailwind CSS and shadcn/ui
- **🔄 Data Migration**: Built-in utilities for migrating and transforming data
- **✅ Type Safety**: End-to-end type safety with TypeScript and Zod validation
- **🧪 Comprehensive Testing**: Unit and integration tests with high coverage

## Architecture

### Frontend Architecture
- **Framework**: Next.js 15 with App Router
- **Styling**: Tailwind CSS with shadcn/ui components (New York style, stone base color)  
- **State Management**: TanStack Query for server state, localStorage for auth tokens
- **Validation**: Zod schemas as single source of truth for types and validation
- **Testing**: Vitest with coverage support and UI mode

### Backend Architecture
- **Database**: PostgreSQL with Drizzle ORM
- **API**: Next.js API routes following RESTful patterns
- **Authentication**: JWT with Bearer tokens, 24h expiration
- **Schema**: Centralized in `app/api/lib/schema.ts` with proper relations
- **Error Handling**: Portuguese error messages with consistent format

### Key Patterns
- **Type Safety**: Zod schemas inferred to TypeScript types across the stack
- **API Layer**: Custom `fetchWithAuth()` utility with automatic 401 handling
- **Component Structure**: Feature-based organization with reusable UI components
- **Data Flow**: Forms → Zod validation → TanStack Query → Database via Drizzle

## Project Structure

```
app/
├── api/                    # Next.js API routes
│   ├── auth/              # Authentication endpoints
│   ├── categories/        # Category CRUD operations
│   ├── transactions/      # Transaction management
│   └── lib/               # Database schema and utilities
├── categories/            # Category management pages
├── transactions/          # Transaction pages
└── components/            # Reusable UI components
    └── ui/                # shadcn/ui components

lib/
├── schemas.ts             # Zod validation schemas
└── utils/                 # Utility functions

tests/
├── unit/                  # Unit tests
├── integration/           # Integration tests
└── helpers/               # Test utilities
```

## Learn More

To learn more about the technologies used:

- [Next.js Documentation](https://nextjs.org/docs) - Next.js features and API
- [Drizzle ORM](https://orm.drizzle.team/) - TypeScript ORM documentation
- [shadcn/ui](https://ui.shadcn.com/) - Re-usable component library
- [TanStack Query](https://tanstack.com/query) - Data fetching and state management
- [Zod](https://zod.dev/) - TypeScript-first schema validation

## Deployment

### Environment Variables

Required environment variables for production:

```bash
DATABASE_URL=postgresql://username:password@host:port/database
JWT_SECRET=your-secret-key-here
NEXTAUTH_SECRET=your-nextauth-secret
```

### Database Setup

1. Set up a PostgreSQL database
2. Run migrations: `pnpm drizzle-kit push:pg`  
3. Optionally seed with default data via the migration API

### Deploy on Vercel

The easiest way to deploy is using the [Vercel Platform](https://vercel.com/new):

1. Connect your GitHub repository
2. Add environment variables
3. Deploy automatically on every push to main

Check out the [Next.js deployment documentation](https://nextjs.org/docs/app/building-your-application/deploying) for more details.

## Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Please read our [Contributing Guidelines](CONTRIBUTING.md) before submitting a pull request.

### How to Contribute

1. Fork the repository
2. Create your feature branch (`git checkout -b feature/amazing-feature`)
3. Commit your changes (`git commit -m 'feat: add some amazing feature'`)
4. Push to the branch (`git push origin feature/amazing-feature`)
5. Open a Pull Request

Please ensure your code:
- Follows the project's coding standards
- Includes appropriate tests
- Passes all linting and type checks
- Has been tested locally

## Security

Security is a top priority for a financial application. Please review:

- [Security Policy](SECURITY.md) - How to report vulnerabilities
- [Security Audit Report](SECURITY_AUDIT.md) - Latest security audit findings

If you discover a security vulnerability, please follow our [Security Policy](SECURITY.md) for responsible disclosure.

## License

Copyright (c) 2026 Tiago A Marek. All rights reserved.

This project is proprietary and confidential. You may view the source code for educational, reference, or evaluation purposes only. Any use, modification, distribution, or reproduction requires express written permission from the copyright holder. See the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for complete terms and conditions.

## Acknowledgments

- Built with [Next.js](https://nextjs.org/)
- UI components from [shadcn/ui](https://ui.shadcn.com/)
- Database ORM by [Drizzle](https://orm.drizzle.team/)
- State management with [TanStack Query](https://tanstack.com/query)
- Validation with [Zod](https://zod.dev/)

---

**Disclaimer**: This is a personal project for educational and portfolio purposes. While security best practices have been implemented, use at your own risk for managing actual financial data. Always ensure you have proper backups and security measures in place.

Commit message:

chore: change license from proprietary to Apache 2.0
- Update LICENSE to Apache License 2.0
- Update package.json license field to Apache-2.0
- Update README.md with Apache 2.0 badge and open source notice
- Update CONTRIBUTING.md to welcome community contributions
- Makes project truly open source with commercial use permitted

README.md, after:

# Personal Finance Manager

[![License: Apache 2.0](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-Apache%202.0-blue.svg)](LICENSE)
[![TypeScript](https://img.shields.io/badge/TypeScript-5.x-blue.svg)](https://www.typescriptlang.org/)
[![Next.js](https://img.shields.io/badge/Next.js-15.x-black.svg)](https://nextjs.org/)

This is a [Next.js](https://nextjs.org) project for managing personal finances, built with TypeScript, PostgreSQL, and Drizzle ORM.

> **Note**: This is a personal portfolio project built with modern web technologies. The code is open source under the Apache 2.0 License - you're free to use, modify, and distribute it, including for commercial purposes. See [LICENSE](LICENSE) for details.

## Tech Stack

- **Frontend**: Next.js 15 with App Router, TypeScript, Tailwind CSS, shadcn/ui
- **Database**: PostgreSQL with Drizzle ORM
- **Authentication**: JWT tokens with secure password hashing
- **Testing**: Vitest with comprehensive unit and integration tests
- **Type Safety**: Zod schemas for runtime validation and TypeScript inference

## Getting Started

### Prerequisites

- Node.js 18+ and pnpm
- PostgreSQL database
- Environment variables configured (see `.env.example`)

### Installation

1. Install dependencies:
```bash
pnpm install
```

2. Set up your environment variables:
```bash
cp .env.example .env.local
# Edit .env.local with your database credentials
```

3. Set up the database schema:
```bash
# Generate and apply database migrations
pnpm drizzle-kit generate:pg
pnpm drizzle-kit push:pg
```

4. Start the development server:
```bash
pnpm dev
```

Open [http://localhost:3000](http://localhost:3000) with your browser to see the result.

## Database Schema Management

This project uses [Drizzle ORM](https://orm.drizzle.team/) for database schema management and migrations. The schema is defined in `app/api/lib/schema.ts`.

### Updating Database Schema

When you need to modify the database structure:

#### 1. Update the Schema File

Edit `app/api/lib/schema.ts` to add/modify tables, columns, or relations:

```typescript
// Example: Adding a new column
export const transactions = pgTable("transactions", {
  id: serial("id").primaryKey(),
  // ... existing columns
  newColumn: varchar("new_column", { length: 100 }), // Add new column
});
```

#### 2. Generate Migration Files

Generate SQL migration files based on your schema changes:

```bash
pnpm drizzle-kit generate:pg
```

This creates a new migration file in the `drizzle/` directory with the SQL commands needed to update your database.

#### 3. Apply Migrations to Database

Push the schema changes to your PostgreSQL database:

```bash
pnpm drizzle-kit push:pg
```

This command:
- Applies the generated SQL migrations to your database
- Updates the database structure to match your schema
- Handles column additions, deletions, and modifications

#### 4. Update Zod Schemas (if needed)

If you modified data structures, update the corresponding Zod schemas in `lib/schemas.ts`:

```typescript
// Example: Update schema validation
export const TransactionCreateSchema = z.object({
  // ... existing fields
  newField: z.string().optional(), // Add validation for new field
});
```

### Data Migration

For complex schema changes that require data transformation:

#### 1. Check Migration Status

```bash
curl -X GET http://localhost:3000/api/admin/migrate-categories
```

#### 2. Run Data Migration

```bash
curl -X POST http://localhost:3000/api/admin/migrate-categories
```

### Best Practices

- **Always backup your database** before running migrations in production
- **Test migrations locally** before applying to production
- **Review generated SQL** in the migration files before applying
- **Use transactions** for complex data migrations
- **Maintain backward compatibility** when possible during schema changes

### Common Commands

```bash
# Check what changes would be applied
pnpm drizzle-kit generate:pg --custom

# Push changes directly (development only)
pnpm drizzle-kit push:pg

# Open Drizzle Studio for database inspection
pnpm drizzle-kit studio

# Introspect existing database
pnpm drizzle-kit introspect:pg
```

### Schema Structure

The current database includes:

- **users**: User accounts with authentication
- **categories**: Transaction categories with user ownership
- **defaultCategories**: System-wide category templates
- **bankAccounts**: User bank accounts with balance tracking
- **creditCards**: Credit card accounts with limits
- **transactions**: All financial transactions with category relationships

## Development Commands

### Frontend
- `pnpm dev` - Start development server
- `pnpm build` - Build for production
- `pnpm lint` - Run ESLint
- `pnpm typecheck` - Run TypeScript compiler check

### Testing
- `pnpm test` - Run all tests
- `pnpm test:watch` - Run tests in watch mode
- `pnpm test:coverage` - Run tests with coverage

### Database
- `pnpm drizzle-kit generate:pg` - Generate migrations
- `pnpm drizzle-kit push:pg` - Apply schema changes
- `pnpm drizzle-kit studio` - Open database studio

## Features

- **💰 Transaction Management**: Create, edit, and categorize income/expense transactions
- **🏦 Multi-Account Support**: Manage multiple bank accounts and credit cards
- **📊 Category System**: Organize transactions with custom categories and visual indicators
- **🔒 Secure Authentication**: JWT-based authentication with password hashing
- **📱 Responsive Design**: Mobile-first design using Tailwind CSS and shadcn/ui
- **🔄 Data Migration**: Built-in utilities for migrating and transforming data
- **✅ Type Safety**: End-to-end type safety with TypeScript and Zod validation
- **🧪 Comprehensive Testing**: Unit and integration tests with high coverage

## Architecture

### Frontend Architecture
- **Framework**: Next.js 15 with App Router
- **Styling**: Tailwind CSS with shadcn/ui components (New York style, stone base color)  
- **State Management**: TanStack Query for server state, localStorage for auth tokens
- **Validation**: Zod schemas as single source of truth for types and validation
- **Testing**: Vitest with coverage support and UI mode

### Backend Architecture
- **Database**: PostgreSQL with Drizzle ORM
- **API**: Next.js API routes following RESTful patterns
- **Authentication**: JWT with Bearer tokens, 24h expiration
- **Schema**: Centralized in `app/api/lib/schema.ts` with proper relations
- **Error Handling**: Portuguese error messages with consistent format

### Key Patterns
- **Type Safety**: Zod schemas inferred to TypeScript types across the stack
- **API Layer**: Custom `fetchWithAuth()` utility with automatic 401 handling
- **Component Structure**: Feature-based organization with reusable UI components
- **Data Flow**: Forms → Zod validation → TanStack Query → Database via Drizzle

## Project Structure

```
app/
├── api/                    # Next.js API routes
│   ├── auth/              # Authentication endpoints
│   ├── categories/        # Category CRUD operations
│   ├── transactions/      # Transaction management
│   └── lib/               # Database schema and utilities
├── categories/            # Category management pages
├── transactions/          # Transaction pages
└── components/            # Reusable UI components
    └── ui/                # shadcn/ui components

lib/
├── schemas.ts             # Zod validation schemas
└── utils/                 # Utility functions

tests/
├── unit/                  # Unit tests
├── integration/           # Integration tests
└── helpers/               # Test utilities
```

## Learn More

To learn more about the technologies used:

- [Next.js Documentation](https://nextjs.org/docs) - Next.js features and API
- [Drizzle ORM](https://orm.drizzle.team/) - TypeScript ORM documentation
- [shadcn/ui](https://ui.shadcn.com/) - Re-usable component library
- [TanStack Query](https://tanstack.com/query) - Data fetching and state management
- [Zod](https://zod.dev/) - TypeScript-first schema validation

## Deployment

### Environment Variables

Required environment variables for production:

```bash
DATABASE_URL=postgresql://username:password@host:port/database
JWT_SECRET=your-secret-key-here
NEXTAUTH_SECRET=your-nextauth-secret
```

### Database Setup

1. Set up a PostgreSQL database
2. Run migrations: `pnpm drizzle-kit push:pg`  
3. Optionally seed with default data via the migration API

### Deploy on Vercel

The easiest way to deploy is using the [Vercel Platform](https://vercel.com/new):

1. Connect your GitHub repository
2. Add environment variables
3. Deploy automatically on every push to main

Check out the [Next.js deployment documentation](https://nextjs.org/docs/app/building-your-application/deploying) for more details.

## Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Please read our [Contributing Guidelines](CONTRIBUTING.md) before submitting a pull request.

### How to Contribute

1. Fork the repository
2. Create your feature branch (`git checkout -b feature/amazing-feature`)
3. Commit your changes (`git commit -m 'feat: add some amazing feature'`)
4. Push to the branch (`git push origin feature/amazing-feature`)
5. Open a Pull Request

Please ensure your code:
- Follows the project's coding standards
- Includes appropriate tests
- Passes all linting and type checks
- Has been tested locally

## Security

Security is a top priority for a financial application. Please review:

- [Security Policy](SECURITY.md) - How to report vulnerabilities
- [Security Audit Report](SECURITY_AUDIT.md) - Latest security audit findings

If you discover a security vulnerability, please follow our [Security Policy](SECURITY.md) for responsible disclosure.

## License

Copyright (c) 2026 Tiago A Marek

Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License"); you may not use this project except in compliance with the License. You may obtain a copy of the License at:

http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied. See the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for the specific language governing permissions and limitations under the License.

### What does this mean?

This project is **open source** and you are free to:
- Use it for personal or commercial purposes
- Modify and adapt the code
- Distribute original or modified versions
- Include it in proprietary software

You must:
- Include the original copyright notice and license
- State any significant changes you made
- Include a copy of the Apache 2.0 License

The software is provided "as-is" without warranties.

## Acknowledgments

- Built with [Next.js](https://nextjs.org/)
- UI components from [shadcn/ui](https://ui.shadcn.com/)
- Database ORM by [Drizzle](https://orm.drizzle.team/)
- State management with [TanStack Query](https://tanstack.com/query)
- Validation with [Zod](https://zod.dev/)

---

**Disclaimer**: This is a personal project for educational and portfolio purposes. While security best practices have been implemented, use at your own risk for managing actual financial data. Always ensure you have proper backups and security measures in place.
